
# Follow-up - 17 August 2021

Hey, I really enjoyed today's class, I hope you did, too.

I write a follow-up whenever I said stuff, or put stuff on the
board that emerged during a session. This is uploaded to GitHub
where you can comment, ask further, remind me of something I
promised and forgot, or raise any other issue. This may show up in
the weekly tests (and then also in the final exam, which is
sourced from the tests).

Don't worry about the amount (or type) of information contained
herein: I write these things up partly for myself, and partly for
those interested, but I don't expect you to learn or know them at
any point during this class. And I'll cease writing them up when I
run out of time, which I often do towards the end of term.

As part of your term project, you will come across a lot of new
technical terms. To sort through them, you'll need to create a
glossary. These follow-ups are my glossary for the course.

([Whiteboard](https://drive.google.com/file/d/14GruRbuXnLwofI_6nj8yIAC8P6atYD8I/view?usp=sharing))


## Agile methods

"Kanban" is the Japanese word for "sign". It stands for a simple
"agile" method (in the technical sense) of organizing tasks on a
board using post-its or other means. An app that implements the
Kanban principle for private users is Trello. Kanban boards -
often analog rather than digital - are common in production
(e.g. to keep an overview of warehouse stock). In the course, you
will use the agile method "Scrum" for your project work. Agile
methods are widely used in industry and software engineering.


## LaTeX and TeX

Gold standard of Open Source text formatting and font systems
(there is another one just for fonts called Metafont). Created by
Donald Knuth from Stanford U. who is also the author of the
seminal "The Art of Computer Programming" ([Knuth, 2011](#org00c9453)), usually
abbreviated to [TAOCP](https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/taocp.html). As soon as my boat has arrived from Europe,
you should take a look at these books, which are mainly about
algorithms, fairly mathematical, voluminous (10,000 pages) and
difficult (Bill Gates is rumored to have offered a job at
Microsoft for anyone who read the whole series). For the book,
Knuth created an artificial assembly language, MIX, which runs on
a hypothetical MIX computer. A little like like pseudocode.


## Git and Linux

The Linux kernel and the version control program were both
created by Finnish-American computer programmer Linus
Torvalds. The connection: Linux is one of the largest (if not the
largest) open source project. I'll be teaching operating systems
in Spring 2022, and Linux will figure prominently in that
course. Git is the software used for the GitHub developers'
platform (and many other similar platforms, like GitLab,
BitBucket, SourceForge etc.)


## Emacs editor

You're going to hear, and see, enough of this "extensible text
editor" written in Lisp (one of the oldest functional programming
languages). Emacs is a great Integrated Development Environment
(IDE), and much more than that. I use it as an IDE for R in
connection with the Emacs Speaks Statistics (`ESS`) package, but
I also use the Org-mode package for all my note taking and task
management, and as an alternative to the interactive Jupyter
notebook. Notebooks are an example of Literate Programming,
another invention of Donald Knuth's.


## Big Data

We discussed the meaning of the "3V" definition of big data -
volume (of the data, usually these days no less than 1 petabyte =
1 million gigabyte), velocity (speed at which data are streamed
and, if possible, processed in real time), and variety (the many
different types and formats of data - audio, video and text). All
of these can be measured and controlled fairly well - if they can
be stored, used etc. is a matter of data wrangling (usually the
most laborious part of the data scientist's work). There are other
definitions, up to "5V", including "value" (to a beneficiary,
e.g. a company collecting the data), and "veracity" (which relates
to data quality - an issue of growing importance). Value and
veracity are harder to measure directly, which is why I don't
usually included them in my Big Data definition.


## Afterword

I usually pepper the follow-ups with links and articles, but I'm
tired, and I still have another syllabus to write and a lecture
to prepare so I'll leave this job to you!

In our second session later this week, I'll finish the course
overview and I'll introduce you to the GitHub and DataCamp
platforms. That'll do for the start!


## References

<a id="org00c9453"></a> [Knuth, D (2011). The Art of Computer
Programming. CA: Addison-Wesley.](https://www.amazon.com/Computer-Programming-Volumes-1-4A-Boxed/dp/0321751043)

