
# Follow-up 19 Aug

([Whiteboards](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/18vQJNIoLDSlADEF1tu5pwuHUVwVq6Xay?usp=sharing))


## Remember words and know concepts

It may sound trivial and/or tedious to you, but knowing concepts
and terms, and remembering them is better than having to look them
up. Being able to look them up is, of course, better than not
being able to do even that. Learning anything also consists of
learning a certain number of technical terms. You've probably been
brought up with Google search, instead of having to go to a book
shelf or a library, or having to ask a real person. But Google
does not replace own knowledge - information that you own, and
that you know you own because you don't have to think twice if
someone asks you. It is true that there is much less to learn by
heart in STEM than, say, in poetry, or even in the life sciences
or medicine. And in future, AI will likely be able to help you
even more with remembering stuff. But core technical terms and
concepts aren't just "stuff", they are like scaffold of ideas
around which the regular stuff is only draped. One of my jobs as a
teacher is to help you separate the stuff from the scaffold.

For your presentation, projects, and all that, you need to do some
semblance of research. When you do that, you should build a
glossary of terms - definitions that you ideally craft
yourself. You can also use these definitions in your writing and
presenting (in other words: a good glossary is a valid research
result). In fact, Wikipedia is nothing but a giant glossary.

This is a long explanation why, at the start of a session, I ask
you if you remember any words or concepts or ideas from the last
session, and this challenge will also enter the weekly tests that
you write in class to get back into the topic.


## Markup and Markdown

The standard format of text documents on GitHub is markdown. This
is similar but different from markup language (like HTML). Both
are formatting languages. HTML (markup) has evolved into HTML5
(for interactive web pages) and XML (for industrial data
transfer). Markdown is much simpler but the concept is the same as
for markup: separation of content and formatting so that you have
your head free for content and don't have to worry about
formatting at the same time (which is the WYSIWIG, or What You See
Is What You Get, concept of WORD and other text processing
programs).


## DataCamp

DataCamp is a training platform specialising on data science in
three languages, R, Python and SQL, as well as utilities and
productivity tools (like Git, Shell, etc.). DataCamp has an
interesting blog with tutorials, webinars, assessments, and
more. I've used it as a training platform to supplement my
teaching since a couple of years. The academic alliance with
DataCamp is worth US$ 300 per year. During your membership, you
can do any number of courses and earn certificates, which you can
then e.g. display on your web pages or add to your resume. For
this course, you are assigned 15 different chapters from different
DataCamp courses, about one every week. Each chapter will take
15-30 minutes to complete. You must complete 50% or at least 8
chapters on time to pass the course. The content is roughly in
line with the classroom instruction.


## Laptops in class

If you don't have a laptop or don't want or can't bring one to
class, you should come in time to get a lab PC. An own laptop is
not always necessary, but always useful. If there are not enough
PC places, you may have to work in pairs on one machine. Having a
computer to type on is important because your hands develop muscle
memory - for the same reason you should always type instructions
yourself and not cut and paste. From week 2 onwards, we'll program
pretty much every time, so you'll be busy typing.


## References

In this course, references must be consistent and complete. You're
of course used to that from your liberal arts courses. Consistency
means that you pick one citation style (I don't care which one) -
e.g. [APA](https://apastyle.apa.org/). If you use bibliographic software (like Mendeley, or
Citavi, or Zotero), the software will help you pick a style and
maintain consistency. Completeness means that every reference (no
matter if you reference a personal communication, a blog, a book,
an article, a web page, an image etc.) must have: author, date,
title and place of publication (no matter if any of these are
missing - then you should indicate that they're missing). A URL or
link is not a complete reference (in fact, it's nothing, certainly
not a place of publication). Partly because you're also liberal
arts people, I pull no punches in this area and I'll mercilessly
mark you down for violations of this rule ("consistency and
completeness"), which may appear formal to you, but which is super
important, especially in our times of relentless abuse and
ignorance of intellectual property rights! End of rant!

